JVM Ergonomics Profiles (#12)
microsoft/openjdk-proposals: ergonomics_profiles/readme.md

Summary
-------

> Introduce ergonomics profiles and add a `balanced` option, for the existing heuristics, and a `dedicated` option for when the JVM is running on systems with dedicated resources for the one JVM process.

Author: I'll keep this `balanced` for now, but will review back later.

> Introduce ergonomics profiles and add a `balanced` option, for the existing heuristics, and a `dedicated` option for when the JVM is running on systems with dedicated resources for the one JVM process.

Author: Alright, I changed to `shared` in [7fd7e8c](https://github.com/microsoft/openjdk-proposals/pull/12/commits/7fd7e8cc1de80e4557b88af99c327633f72b64c6)

Goals
-----

1. Introduce the concept of ergonomics profiles.
1. Introduce a new flag to select an ergonomic profile.
1. Define existing heuristics and ergonomics as `balanced`.
1. Introduce a `dedicated` profile designed for systems with dedicated resources not expected to be shared with other processes.

> 1. Automatically select `dedicated` when the JVM believes the system is dedicated to it.

Author: Done: [7fd7e8c](https://github.com/microsoft/openjdk-proposals/pull/12/commits/7fd7e8cc1de80e4557b88af99c327633f72b64c6)

Summary
-------

Introduce a new JVM feature for Ergonomics Profiles, with a `shared` profile for the existing heuristics and a `dedicated` option for when the JVM is running on systems with dedicated resources for the one JVM process.

Goals
-----

1. Introduce the concept of ergonomics profiles.
1. Introduce a new flag to select an ergonomic profile.
1. Define existing heuristics and ergonomics as `shared`.

> 1. Introduce a `dedicated` profile designed for systems where the JVM is effectively the only process using resources, e.g. In a canonical container deployment scenario.

Author: Perhaps a better way to day is "is the primary process"

1. Automatically select the `dedicated` profile when the JVM believes system resources are dedicated to it.

Non-Goals
---------

It is not a goal of this JEP to ensure applications' performance will be improved when running under the `dedicated` profile.

Success Metrics
---------------

No specific success metrics needed.

Motivation
----------

> The default JVM ergonomics were designed to be balanced with shared resources, with the understanding that it would share resources with other processes (e.g., a data store) running on a shared environment, such as a bare metal server or a large virtual machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default JVM ergonomics were designed to share resources with other processes (e.g., a data store) running on a shared environment, such as a bare metal server or a large virtual machine.
```

> On a study done by an APM vendor (New Relic), it was identified that more than 60% of monitored JVMs in production are running inside environments with resources dedicated to the JVM (i.e., In containers), as opposed to being shared. A large percentage of those JVMs with dedicated resources were running without explicit JVM tuning flags. Therefore the JVM was running with default ergonomics that are traditionally aimed at shared environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On a study done by an APM vendor (New Relic), it was identified that more than 60% of monitored JVMs in production are running inside environments with resources dedicated to the JVM (i.e., In containers), as opposed to being shared. A large percentage of those JVMs with dedicated resources were running without explicit JVM tuning flags. Therefore the JVM was running with default ergonomics traditionally aimed at shared environments.
```

**Memory Allocation**

The default maximum heap size of the JVM varies from 50% to 25%, depending on how much memory is available in the environment. The table below describes the current heuristics of OpenJDK 21:

**_Max heap size_**

| Available memory | Default |
|------------------|---------|
| < 256 MB         | 50%     |
| 256 - 512 MB     | ~126 MB |
| >= 512 MB        | 25%     |

The initial heap size also varies. The table below describes the current heuristics of OpenJDK 21:

**_Initial heap size_**

| Available memory | Default      |
|------------------|--------------|
| <= 512 MB        | 8 MB         |
| >= 512 MB        | 1.5625%-1.7% |

**_Min heap size_**

| Available memory | Default      |
|------------------|--------------|
| 64 MB – 8192 MB  | 8 MB         |

It is possible to observe that these amounts don't adequately map to the intended resource plan of dedicated environments, where the user may have already considered to allocate e.g. 4GB of memory to the JVM, and expect it to use 4GB of memory. The JVM will instead use, in this example, 1GB of memory, and the user will have to manually tune the JVM to use the expected amount of memory.

> Further on, it is likely that the JVM does not need to reclaim heap memory as soon as it does in shared environments, as the JVM is the only process running on the system. This means that the JVM may set the initial heap size the same as maximum heap size, while having a fair minimum heap size for other memory pools consumption (e.g. native memory). This shall hint to the garbage collector to delay, or act more lazily, on the action of cleaning and reclaiming heap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Further on, it is likely that the JVM can reclaim heap memory later than it does in shared environments, as the JVM is the only process running on the system. This means that the JVM may set the initial heap size as maximum heap size, while having a suitable minimum heap size for other memory pools consumption (e.g. native memory). This shall signal to the garbage collector to delay, or act more lazily, on the action of cleaning and reclaiming heap.
```

* Server: 1 “active processor” for each CPU
* Cgroups-based counting on cpu_quota/cpu_period

The user may override the calculation with the parameter `-XX:ActiveProcessorCount=<n>`. In practice, developers tend not to refrain from using this and will expect the JVM to size itself accordingly. But a JVM with a single observed "active processor" may still run multiple threads in parallel. Although they will consume the allowed CPU time much faster, this is negligible in some applications, as the application may have significant wait times for IO operations to finish.

Description
-----------

We propose adding the concept of Ergonomics Profiles while naming the existing default ergonomics as `shared`, and adding a second profile called `dedicated` for when the JVM is to run under environments with resources dedicated to it. New profiles may be added in the future.

**_Selecting a profile_**

To select a profile, we propose a new flag:

    -XX:ErgonomicsProfile=<shared|dedicated>

> Users may also select a profile by setting this flag in the environment variable `JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS`.

Reviewer 2: Is there a reason to call out this env var and not others like `JDK_JAVA_OPTIONS`?

**_Default profile selection_**

The `shared` ergonomics profile will be selected by default. 

If the JVM beleives it is running in a dedicated environment (e.g., containers) then the `dedicated` profile will be activated.

**_Shared profile_**

The `shared` profile is what the HotSpot JVM does today in terms of default ergonomics.

**_Dedicated profile_**

> The `dedicated` profile will contain different heuristics aimed at maximizing resource consumption in the environment with the assumption that the environment is dedicated to the JVM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `dedicated` profile will contain different heuristics aimed at maximizing resource consumption in the environment, assuming that the environment is dedicated to the JVM.
```

> This profile will maximize heap size allocation, optimize garbage collector selection with a larger set of options and considerations, vary the active processor counting, set different values for garbage collector threads, more aggressively size native memory expectation, and size internal JVM thread pools accordingly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This profile will maximize heap size allocation, optimize garbage collector selection with a more extensive set of options and considerations, vary the active processor counting, set different values for garbage collector threads, more aggressively size native memory expectation, and size internal JVM thread pools accordingly.
```

The table below describes what the `dedicated` profile will set for the JVM:

* GC selection: TBD
* Default heap size: TBD
* Active processor counting: TBD
* GC threads: TBD
* Thread pools: TBD

**_Identify selected profile_**

The profile selection may be obtained programmatically by reading the property `java.vm.ergonomics.profile`:

```java
var ergonomicsProfile = System.getProperty("java.vm.ergonomics.profile");
```

The profile selection may also be obtained programmatically through JMX by the inclusion of the following method in `java.management.RuntimeMXBean`:

    String getJvmErgonomicsProfile()

> To allow the backporting of this feature to older versions of OpenJDK, the value may also be obtained through the `MBeanServerConnection.getAttribute` method:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The value may also be obtained through the `MBeanServerConnection.getAttribute` method to allow the backporting of this feature to older versions of OpenJDK:
```

```java
MBeanServerConnection mbs = ...

var oname = new ObjectName(ManagementFactory.RUNTIME_MXBEAN_NAME);
var ergonomicsProfile = mbs.getAttribute(oname, "JvmErgonomicsProfile");
```

Alternatives
------------

> At this moment, the only alternative to this proposal is by manualling tuning the JVM. This exercise is very often complex, difficult, and time consuming for Java developers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, the only alternative to this proposal is manually tuning the JVM. This exercise is often complex, challenging, and time-consuming for Java developers.
```

Testing
-------

// What kinds of test development and execution will be required in order

> // to validate this enhancement, beyond the usual mandatory unit tests?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// to validate this enhancement beyond the usual mandatory unit tests?
```

// Be sure to list any special platform or hardware requirements.

Risks and Assumptions
---------------------

None at this time.

Dependencies
------------

> List of related issues, in no particular order, that may have to be addressed before this JEP, or that this JEP may have address as part of its implementation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
List of related issues, in no particular order, that may have to be addressed before this JEP or that this JEP may have to address as part of its implementation:
```

> 1. [JDK-8261242: [Linux] OSContainer::is_containerized() returns true when run outside a container](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8261242)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [JDK-8261242: \[Linux\] OSContainer::is_containerized() returns true when run outside a container](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8261242)
```
